# Structural Referen-free Deconvolution and Bayesian Inference (sRFDBI)

Official MATLAB implementation of structural reference-free deconvolution and Bayesian inference (sRFDBI) algorithm.

we propose a novel cancer diagnosis model through structural reference-free deconvolution and Bayesian inference (sRFDBI) on plasma cfDNA methylation profiles. Specifically, the structural reference-free deconvolution algorithm aims at exploiting the methylation signatures to predict the fraction of the tumor-derived cfDNA. Subsequently, Bayesian inference is introduced to make the final cancer diagnostic decision by excavating discriminative features from the predicted tumor fraction. To evaluate the performance of the tumor fraction prediction and the cancer diagnosis, we test the sRFDBI on an elaborately designed simulation dataset and real plasma samples, separately. The experimental results exhibit a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.951 between the estimated and the true tumor fraction, which outperforms the current reference-based deconvolution approaches. Besides, the sRFDBI significantly ameliorates the diagnostic performance over the popular machine learning classifiers, including random forest, neural networks and support vector machine, on both simulation and real datasets. More importantly, the sRFDBI can effectively reduce the diagnostic bias when handling severely imbalanced datasets.


## Prerequisites

MATLAB R2018b

## Usage
```
run main.m
```
Initialization.m is a parameter configuration file.

Options in the parameter configuration file:
+ *train_data_dir*: the address of training data. 
+ *test_data_dir*: the address of test data.
+ *param*: the parameters for the sRFDBI algorithm, including $p$ in $l_{2,p}$ norm, coefficient of structural penalty $\lambda$, the number of cancer methylation patterns, the number of healthy methylation patterns, convergence threshold $\varepsilon$, maximum iterations $T$ and prior.

## File instruction

The 'data' directory contains two exemplary datasets: simulation dataset and real dataset.

+ *simulation_dataset*: *train_data* is a $(K+1) \times N_1$ matrix. The first $K$ rows represent methyaltion data ( $N_1$ samples, each with K dimentional methylation levels, i.e. $\beta$ value). The last row suggests the category of each training sample. Similarly, *test_data* is a $(K+1) \times N_2$ matrix. *train_theta* and *test_theta* denote the simulated tumor fraction of training and test samples.
+ *real_dataset*: *train_data* and *test_data* are generated by randomly splitting the original dataset with a ratio of $1:1$.

The final results for each dataset contains two rows: the first row is cancer diagnostic results and the second row indicates tumor fraction prediction.

## References
If you find this code useful, please cite this work.
The reference will be updated soon.
